Introducing Zephir
==================
Zephir is a language that addresses the major needs of a PHP developer trying to write and compile code that can be executed
by PHP. It is dynamically/statically typed, and some of its features will be familiar to PHP developers.

The name Zephir is a contraction of the words Z(end) E(ngine)/PH(P)/I(nte)r(mediate). While this suggests that the
pronunciation should be "zephyr", the creators of Zephir actually pronounce it zaefire_.

Hello World!
------------
Every language has its own "Hello World!" sample. In Zephir, this introductory example showcases some important features of
the language.

Code in Zephir must be placed in classes. The language is intended to create object-oriented libraries/frameworks, so code
outside of a class is not allowed. Additionally, a namespace is required:

.. code-block:: zephir

    namespace Test;

    /**
     * This is a sample class
     */
    class Hello
    {
        /**
         * This is a sample method
         */
        public function say()
        {
            echo "Hello World!";
        }
    }

Once this class is compiled it will produce the following code, that is transparently compiled by gcc/clang/vc++:

.. code-block:: c

    #ifdef HAVE_CONFIG_H
    #include "config.h"
    #endif

    #include "php.h"
    #include "php_test.h"
    #include "test.h"

    #include "kernel/main.h"

    /**
     * This is a sample class
     */
    ZEPHIR_INIT_CLASS(Test_Hello) {
        ZEPHIR_REGISTER_CLASS(Test, Hello, hello, test_hello_method_entry, 0);
        return SUCCESS;
    }

    /**
     * This is a sample method
     */
    PHP_METHOD(Test_Hello, say) {
        php_printf("%s", "Hello World!");
    }

Actually, it is not expected that a developer that uses Zephir must know or even understand C. However, if you have any
experience with compilers, PHP internals, or the C language itself, that will provide a clearer understanding of what's going
on internally when working with Zephir.

A Taste of Zephir
-----------------
In the following examples, we’ll describe just enough of the details to understand what’s going on. The goal is to give you a
sense of what programming in Zephir is like. We’ll explore the *details* of the features in subsequent chapters.

The following example is very simple; it implements a class and a method, with a small program that checks the types of an
array.

Let’s examine the code in detail, so we can begin to learn Zephir syntax. There are a lot of details in just a few lines of
code! We’ll explain the general ideas here:

.. code-block:: zephir

    namespace Test;

    /**
     * MyTest (test/mytest.zep)
     */
    class MyTest
    {
        public function someMethod()
        {
            /* Variables must be declared */
            var myArray;
            int i = 0, length;

            /* Create an array */
            let myArray = ["hello", 0, 100.25, false, null];

            /* Count the array into a 'int' variable */
            let length = count(myArray);

            /* Print value types */
            while i < length {
                echo typeof myArray[i], "\n";
                let i++;
            }

            return myArray;
        }
    }

In the method, the first lines use the 'var' and 'int' keywords. There are used to declare a variable in the local scope.
Every variable used in a method must be declared with its respective type. This declaration is not optional - it helps the
compiler warn you about mistyped variables, or about the use of variables out of scope, which usually ends in runtime errors.

Dynamic variables are declared with the keyword 'var'. These variables can be assigned and reassigned to different types. On
the other hand, the 'int' variables are statically typed integer variables, that can only have integer values in the entire
program execution.

In contrast with PHP, you are not required to put a dollar sign ($) in front of variable names.

Zephir follows the same comment conventions as Java, C#, C++, etc. A :code:`// comment` goes to the end of a line, while a
:code:`/* comment */` can cross line boundaries.

Variables are, by default, immutable. This means that Zephir expects that most variables will stay unchanged. Variables that
maintain their initial value can be optimized down by the compiler to static constants. When the variable value needs to be
changed, the keyword 'let' must be used:

.. code-block:: zephir

    /* Create an array */
    let myArray = ["hello", 0, 100.25, false, null];

By default, arrays are dynamically typed like in PHP - they may contain values of different types. Functions from the PHP
userland can be called in Zephir code. In the next example, the function 'count' is called, but the compiler can perform
optimizations like avoiding this call, because it already knows the size of the array:

.. code-block:: zephir

    /* Count the array into a 'int' variable */
    let length = count(myArray);

Parentheses in control flow statements are optional. You can use them if you feel more comfortable doing so, but you aren't
required to.

.. code-block:: zephir

    while i < length {
        echo typeof myArray[i], "\n";
        let i++;
    }

Since PHP only works with dynamic variables, methods always return dynamic variables. This means that if a statically typed
variable is returned, in the PHP side you will get a dynamic variable that can be used in PHP code. Note that memory is
automatically managed by the compiler, similarly to how PHP does it, so you don't need to allocate or free memory like in C.

.. _zaefire: http://translate.google.com/#en/en/zaefire
